---
layout: mod_post
title: SSI-on-Blockchain is Objectively a Bad Thing
date: 2022-07-07 22:21:46 -0400
categories: blockchain
permalink: /ssi.html
description: Blockchain (or “DLT”) adds no functionality to a SSI/Identity system that is not equally well, if not better, provided by a QR code on paper. None of the benefits Blockchain is supposed to bring hold up under mild scrutiny. Blockchain adds significant complexity and cost, as well as usability issues and serious privacy concerns. “Blockchain” in SSI exists for PR only, not for engineering reasons.
updated: 2022-07-15
---

**Summary / TLDR:** Blockchain (or “DLT”) adds no functionality to a SSI/Identity system
that is not equally well, if not better, provided by a QR code on paper. None of the
benefits Blockchain is supposed to bring hold up under mild scrutiny. Blockchain adds
significant complexity and cost, as well as usability issues and serious privacy
concerns. “Blockchain” in SSI exists for PR only, not for engineering reasons.

**Note**: I am only going to talk about the “blockchain” part of Self-sovereign
Identity. Many things, good and bad, can be said about self-sovereign identity, but in
order to keep the scope of this document manageable, I'll leave the broader
SSI-discussion to others.


* TOC
{:toc}


## Terminology

* **Blockchain**, or **DLT** (“Distributed Ledger Technology”), typically describes a
  database system (“ledger”) similar to the one cryptocurrencies, like Bitcoin, are
  built on. In theory, they are supposed to be permissionless (anyone can write and read
  the ledger), decentralized (no single authority controls the ledger). They are
  typically constructed as immutable, append-only structures - meaning you can never
  modify, even delete, data from it. (Certain optimizations exist that allow
  participants to phase out old data in some DLTs, but deletion cannot be enforced -
  i.e., it is insufficient, or at least a gray area, for GDPR purposes)
* **Self-Sovereign Identity (SSI)** is the idea that, instead of having a central party
  (e.g. government, Google/Apple, …) issue you an ID, you issue your ID yourself and
  have the third parties notarize it. This is frequently sold as a “take the power back”
  approach from Big Tech (or Governments). The most well-known standards for digital
  identity are W3C’s Decentralized Identifiers (DID) and Verifiable Credentials (VC). These
  are heavily sponsored & driven by blockchain-based startups.

## SSI and Blockchain

The intersection of Self-Sovereign Identity and Blockchain is a great example for how
Blockchain technology does not live up to it’s hype. Government institutions, such as
the EU, pump millions into research [directly](
https://cordis.europa.eu/project/id/871932/reporting), as well as indirectly - the top 2
blockchain use-cases on the [European Blockchain Services Infrastructure (EBSI)
website](https://ec.europa.eu/digital-building-blocks/wikis/display/EBSI/Use+cases) are
“Identity” and the SSI-based “Diploma”. The [top Google result](
https://builtin.com/blockchain/blockchain-applications) for “real world blockchain uses”
prominently features Identity-startups.

But it’s certainly possible to use Digital Identity / VCs without any blockchain: The
EU’s digital vaccination certificates use W3C’s VCs. The EU has managed to scale it up
to [1.7 Billion certificates](
https://ec.europa.eu/info/sites/default/files/second_report_of_the_commission_on_the_eu_digital_covid_certificate_regulation_annex.pdf) - but that’s *after* they [got rid of all the blockchain stuff](
  https://www.securid.com/blog/the-new-technology-powering-european-covid-certificates/), 
which they unsuccessfully experimented with before. So if SSI works just fine without
blockchain, the obvious question is, what value does Blockchain add to SSI?

It turns out, even proponents of the SSI-on-Blockchain idea don’t seem to have
a clear narrative - everyone seems to claim something else. There are, however,
6 commonly touted benefits:

* Blockchain increases trust in the digital identity credentials, e.g. **your** digital
  passport \[e.g. [IBM SSI Blog: “Why Blockchain”](
  https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2018/06/self-sovereign-identity-why-blockchain/)\], 
* Blockchain increases trust in the **issuers** of the credentials \[[IBM SSI Blog:
  ‘Trusted Labels’](
  https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2019/11/blockchain-for-trusted-security-labels/), 
  [Forbes](
  https://www.forbes.com/sites/alastairjohnson/2021/11/15/beyond-the-device-with-self-sovereign-identities/?sh=1d3e3bda683f)\]
* Blockchain makes **fraud** harder \[e.g. [Techtarget](
  https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/feature/Explore-self-sovereign-identity-use-cases-and-benefits), 
  [Fintech News](
  https://www.fintechnews.org/how-to-fight-the-fraud-crisis-through-blockchain-and-self-sovereign-identity/), 
  [TU Delft](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.01926.pdf)\], 
* Blockchain allows **trusted time-stamping**, i.e. proofs that credentials were issued
  before some specific point in time \[[EU Blockchain Forum](
  https://www.eublockchainforum.eu/sites/default/files/report_identity_v0.9.4.pdf)\], 
* Blockchain avoids **third parties** for storage/access \[[IBM](
  https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/2019/11/blockchain-for-trusted-security-labels/)
  again\]
* Users have **control over their data** (found in virtually every blog on the subject, and
  even in academic papers, e.g. [this](
  https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=7163223) or [this](
  https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.01926.pdf))

All of these claims fall apart when even mild scrutiny is applied.

It is almost comical how every article or paper on this subject
avoids describing, on a high level, the tradeoffs in terms of risk, or trust,
or engineering.

In a problem space that deals exclusively with (chains, webs, direct, indirect) *trust*, 
you’d think *someone* would write a comparison of DLT and non-DLT, on “which third
parties do I need to trust, and what happens when they fail, or they are malicious”. It
seems like engineering 101 - yet such comparisons are completely absent from anything
I encountered while researching this article.

It is somewhat mind-boggling how the “blockchain is the future”-assumption just keeps
getting cargo-culted through the pitch decks - and even through scientific papers -, and
nobody seems to fact-check that assumption, ever.

## Put Your Engineering Hat On and Nothing Adds Up

### The Bad

The following discusses the claimed common benefits mentioned before, and how blockchain
adds - in the best case - no value, but frequently makes the problem area worse.

* **Your digital identity does not become more trusted.** If everyone can write to the
  blockchain, the fact that “your identity is on the blockchain” doesn’t mean anything
  by itself. Therefore there is no difference in authenticity (or trustworthiness) of
  some “piece of data” whether it’s on a QR code on your smartphone, or in a public
  blockchain.
  
  Authenticity is typically established through digital signatures, e.g. a
  federal agency would digitally sign a document stating “Taylor Swift is 21+ years
  old”. But that signature can be easily be embedded in a QR code too (and so can a
  “chain” of signatures and certificates, allowing for trust hierarchies). These systems
  exist, and work (see the vaccination passport example).

* **The identity issuers do not become more trusted.** The previous point holds for the
  other side of the equation, the identity of the signature issuer (Certificate
  Authority), too. There are (by necessity) only going to be few trusted entities that
  can act as CAs - after all, for the verification to work, both issuer and subject need
  to trust the same CA. Coordinating this will by necessity only leave a few government
  agencies, or maybe (very large) trusted corporations (such as nationwide utilities, or
  some Big Tech companies).
  1. If there are only few, and they are well-known - for example, a few government
     entities per country - then you can hard-code them in your app - which is exactly
     what’s being done today through your OS’ or browsers CA store.

  2. If there are multiple smaller entities - for example, each landlord issuing digital
     keys, in every city, worldwide - you will need to delegate trust, typically through a
     hierarchy (the landlords are trusted by the city, which in turn are trusted by the
     federal government, or a national utility company - who’s certificates are hard-coded
     in your app). This is the exact structure (virtually) all internet encryption is
     based on. Additionally, the existing system - X509 - supports cross-signing, having
     credentials signed by multiple parties - despite claims to the opposite, this is not
     a unique feature of W3C VCs.

* **Detection of forgery or conflicting credentials is not made easier**. A very common
  argument is that storing claims on a DLT would make it impossible for someone to show
  one certificate to person A and another to person B: The verifier could just look at
  the public ledger, and see the conflict! Variations of this claim include Sovrin’s
  “The blockchain can tell you which \[certificate\] is the most recent one”.

  But this system requires the verifier to look up other credentials that match some
  identifying information - for example, they need to find all IDs named Angela Merkel.
  Being able to perform such lookups requires that the data on the blockchain is PII, and
  storing PII on an immutable ledger is a straight-forward GDPR (and generally, privacy)
  violation.

  There are approaches that try to address this - e.g. using hashes, encryption, or
  zero-knowledge proofs, to obscure the data and make the problem a bit harder, but the
  fundamental problem remains the same - you need to be able to look things up for the
  forgery/conflict detection to work, and that lookup necessarily exposes PII.

  Additionally, there might be valid reasons for a person to have conflicting versions of
  their IDs over time. People change names, change genders, typos happen etc. -
  applications need to be able to handle these. Consider someone in a witness protection
  program, where the existence of a conflicting ID would be outright life-threatening.

* **Verified timestamping adds no practical value, and can be dangerous.** The
  publication timestamp is the only bit of verifiable data that a blockchain *actually*
  adds. In theory, this proves that a piece of data was created no later than a specific
  time T - i.e. that a document has not been “backdated”.

  Now, this *sounds* like a useful feature to have, but, as before, it falls apart under
  closer inspection - mainly because there is no real-world situation where this is truly
  relevant: You’d need to construct a situation where you already trust the issuer to make
  true statements about everything that’s in the document (e.g. in a passport, Name, 
  biometric data, issuance and expiry date), but you somehow don’t trust them that they
  issued (printed) the document in a timely manner.

  This is simply not a problem anyone is having, but it gets worse:

  * Even if this was an actual problem: Nothing stops the document issuer from simply
    issuing multiple entries at different timestamps. As in the previous point
    (“forgery”), this is impossible to detect for third parties.
  * As above, there might be very valid use cases for having a document being backdated.
    Having an anomaly in the issuance timestamp can be anything from uncomfortable to
    outright dangerous.
  * This only works when you trust your Blockchain API gateway - the “anchoring timestamp”
    is part of the block, not the statement, so an untrustworthy API gateway can simply
    change it.[^spv]

  Of course, timestamping services don’t actually
  require blockchain. RFC3161, the most popular timestamping standard, has existed since
  2001 and can be [reasonably decentralized](
  https://gist.github.com/Manouchehri/fd754e402d98430243455713efada710). But even that
  standard is rarely used: a quick [github search for RFC3161](
  https://github.com/search?q=rfc3161) finds only 28 repositories and 1k commits at the
  time of writing - compared to 29k repositories and tens of millions of commits for the
  search term “identity”. DKIM covers this usecase too, and is standard for most emails
  today.

[^spv]: This could partially be mitigated using SPV-style verification, but this requires
    * a PoW chain with reasonably high difficulty - unlikely for any practical application, **and**
    * that the end-device is capable of tracking at least the block headers. Technically feasible for chains with long block intervals (e.g. Bitcoin) but still somewhat resource intensive).

    Hardly a good selling point.

* **You are relying on the same amount of third parties, but likely less trustworthy
  ones.** There are two “third parties” to consider here: The cryptographic trustee, and
  the data provider. The trust model in the former is unchanged, as discussed in the
  first two points.

  The latter third party stores the blockchain for you, and provides you with
  the data through some API. This is required if the DID-system is to scale to a large
  population, like a country or the EU: The blockchain would typically contain
  some entry for every DID or VC; whether that's the document itself, a
  hashed/encrypted version, or an audit log entry. You would then end up with
  billions of entries, not something that will fit on an average phone, or that
  you’d want to keep updated day and night.

  (A few projects, like Sovrin, store only a handful - maybe a few 100 - “root” DIDs
  in a private ledger. As only sovrin can add or revoke from the ledger, the “added
  third party” trust problem remains the same.)

  Adding the dependency on a
  “blockchain API” is equivalent to adding a dependency on a Government or Big Tech, 
  though in most of the existing examples the gateway is operated by a far smaller
  (and/or less reputable) company. What if they are offline? What if they get hacked?
  What if that company has financial incentives to not be honest at all times?

* **You actually give up control over your data, not gaining more.** The “you own your
  data” claim is simply not true, the exact opposite is true. When you upload data to a
  blockchain, it stays there forever. Any Big Tech company that you tried to avoid by
  using DID can happily read along.

  Some systems claim they provide the ability to
  delete data, but even if that were true - by necessity, you pushed the data onto a
  public system, you don’t know if all systems actually act on your deletion request.
  The NSA probably won’t.

  The “control” argument also often seems rooted in some kind of
  encryption scheme, where only the user holds the private key. But this is orthogonal
  to blockchain - if the data is encrypted, you might as well store it at some Big Tech
  provider, even if you don’t trust them. At least then you have one entity to sue if
  your data gets mis-handled. From a privacy perspective, you’re almost certainly better
  off with that approach, too: Metadata analysis companies like Chainalysis make a
  [living](
  https://techcrunch.com/2022/05/10/crypto-forensics-startup-chainalysis-raises-170m-at-8-6b-valuation/), 
  [and](https://fortune.com/2017/08/22/irs-tax-cheats-bitcoin-chainalysis/) [headlines](
  https://www.wired.com/story/tracers-in-the-dark-welcome-to-video-crypto-anonymity-myth/), 
  by correlating data that’s properly encrypted, but on a blockchain.

  The idea that you
  gain control over your data by publicly posting it on the internet is so obviously
  stupid, it’s hard to understand why people insist on repeating it.

### The Ugly

The “Engineering” section would not be complete without pointing out a few obvious
additional drawbacks when using DLTs:

* **Additional complexity**. Adding more moving parts in any IT system should always
  be done with caution, even more so when the system is exposed to the internet, and
  even more so when it is deployed on end-user devices you can't control and thus can't
  centrally coordinate. Complexity adds cost, slows development, and adds
  failure modes.
* **A dependency on an internet connection**. You cannot get the most up-to-date
  state of the blockchain when you’re in a tunnel, in the mountains, or the connection
  is slow and unreliable at a festival where the 5G network is overloaded. This dependency of
  course also means higher latency independent of how good your connection is - if you need
  to pull additional data, things go slower.
* **Transaction cost.** Distributed ledgers - virtually by design - can’t utilize
  economies of scale, making transactions computationally more expensive. In
  addition, all commonly used public ledgers charge fees (and private ledgers
  require you to trust an additional party).

None of these above would be deal breakers, of course, if they were offset by some
additionally gained functionality. But there simply is nothing.

## A Tour Through Literature & Projects

Obviously, thousands of blog posts, articles and papers have been written on the
subject. I’ve tried to collect a representative sample from the most popular (per google
ranking or citations) below:

### Blogs & Articles

**EBSI**, the European Blockchain initiative, is advertising digital identity as one of
their 4 usecases. Technically, 2 others - “Diploma verification” and “Health Insurance
verification” are close enough to DID that it might count, too. They have documentation, 
but it too is devoid of any \*actual \*information what the blockchain actually does.
Their documentation actually implies the opposite: All the usecases that they have
envisioned so far [seem to only write to the ledger](
https://twitter.com/00xou/status/1544063574712139778/photo/1). None of them actually
read from it. Seriously, even the “verify credentials” use-case only [writes an audit
log to the ledger](https://twitter.com/00xou/status/1544063814139871235/photo/1), which
is apparently never read.

The [**IBM Blog** mentioned earlier](
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/blockchain/category/trusted-identity/self-sovereign-identity/)
talks a lot about how they avoid trusted third parties, and establish trust through the
blockchain. They conveniently ignore that all of IBMs blockchain products are based on
their Hyperledger product, a private blockchain developed and typically hosted by IBM -
a third party to the application. In the case of Maersk Tradelens, a product that had
some success through being forced onto Maersk’s customers, all interaction with the
blockchain requires an IBM.com account.

**Wikipedia**’s [Self-Sovereign Identity article](
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-sovereign_identity#cite_ref-eublockchainforum_7-0)
states that SSI is “verified using public-key cryptography anchored on a distributed
ledger.”, but the term “anchored” is never defined.

The source for that statement is a [document](
https://www.eublockchainforum.eu/sites/default/files/report_identity_v0.9.4.pdf) titled
“**Blockchain and Identity” from the EU Blockchain Observatory**. The word “anchored”
does not appear in it. Despite the title, this 27-page document discusses the
“Blockchain” aspect on less than 1 ½ pages, in which they merely hint at possible
options - with plenty “can”, “could”, “might”. Eventually, they identify ‘timestamped
data for eIDAS \[the EUs digital identity system\]‘ as the only viable use case. As
discussed above, this is infeasible in practice. They also mention plenty of problems
around GDPR, and that they really don’t know whether digital signatures on a DLT hold
any legal weight in the EU.

The [**Forbes article** mentioned earlier](
https://www.forbes.com/sites/alastairjohnson/2021/11/15/beyond-the-device-with-self-sovereign-identities/?sh=202f6f22683f)
claims that with DID, “In the future \[online shopping\] deliveries could be made to the
person, wherever they may be at that time, rather than just relying on a home or office
address.”. I was not aware that this was a problem of presenting an ID. According to
that article, DIDs are “biometrically secure” (the author does not provide a reference
for that claim).

### In Academia

I went through the first 5 results on Google Scholar for the search query
[“self-sorvereign identity blockchain”](
https://scholar.google.com/scholar?hl=en&as_sdt=0%2C33&q=self+sovereign+identity+blockchain&btnG=).

The Title **[Self-Sovereign Identity Solutions: The Necessity of Blockchain Technology](
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1904.12816.pdf)** certainly sounds promising, but unfortunately, 
the abstract already lowers ones expectations:

*We conclude that blockchain technology is not explicitly required for a Self-Sovereign
Identity solution but it is a good foundation to build up on, due to various technical
advantages that the blockchain has to offer.*

The paper does not substantiate that claim - all they do is compare 9 Blockchain-based
solutions with 2 non-Blockchain-based solutions.

The paper states that they only focus on self-sovereign identity, and have thus
excluded some identity solutions, and then find that almost all the remaining
ones use blockchain technology! How very convenient, even more convenient that
they left out OpenID or PGP/GPG, arguably two large
non-blockchain players in (or close) to the DID space.

*Still* they can’t seem to manage to create a convincing argument, resorting to
statements like “Still it is more difficult to prove that there are no hidden
algorithms when not using blockchain. So blockchain is definitely a better base
for this property.“ In another spot they casually
mention 

> “However, if a private key is lost it will be difficult to change or remove the
data.”

\- likely illegal under GDPR (because the existence of data that a private-key can
change or delete implies that there is identifiable data on the blockchain - [even
public keys could be PII under GDPR](
<https://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/STUD/2019/634445/EPRS_STU(2019)634445_EN.pdf>)).

In the parts of their comparison where the assumed blockchain solution is not in direct
violation of privacy laws, they helpfully point out that either DLT or non-DLT would get
the job done.

The big reference in the Wikipedia article is “**[In Search of Self-Sovereign Identity
Leveraging Blockchain Technology](https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8776589)**”. Of
its 21 pages, only 3 are actually dedicated to Blockchain, half of which defines
terminology, the other half briefly presents 4 projects that they identify serious
shortcomings with - but they claim \*might \*work in the future. They briefly sketch a
few use-cases, noting that all of them would work without blockchain too, and conclude
with “\[...\] In fact, there have been a few attempts in the form of different
blockchain-based self-sovereign identity systems. However, as per our analysis, none of
them satisfies all the properties of a self-sovereign identity system. \[...\]”.

In the paper **[A Survey on Essential Components of a Self-Sovereign Identity](
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1807.06346.pdf)**, Section II, they claim that the Blockchain
takes the place of “the registrar in a classic DID system”, without explaining what
their job actually is. The key points though are

*In order to accept the identity, the relying party needs to have a trustful
relationship with the claim issuer.* and *The actual identity claim is stored in the
user controlled storage, typically off-chain for privacy considerations. The relying
party, also called claim-verifier, can then compare the publicely \[sic\] available
identifier with the identifier in the claim that has been handed to him by the user.*
This makes zero sense at all. The user hands the *claim-verifer* the claim, the claim is
signed by the issuer, the claim-verifier has a trusting relationship with the issuer.
We’re done! There is no added benefit to comparing the ID to *a database that anyone can
write to*.

**[Deployment of a Blockchain-Based Self-Sovereign Identity](
https://arxiv.org/pdf/1806.01926.pdf)** is actually reasonably well readable. They
sketch some parts of how an on-blockchain system would work, a bit more in-depth than
other papers, but at the expense of completely ignoring any privacy concerns - while
they do come up with a sketch for (but not an actual description) of a zero-knowledge
system to ~encrypt the claims, they fail to describe how the other claimed benefit, the
audit log, would work with this: You can either publicly audit claims, or you can have
privacy. Not both. The paper ignores this.

They do repeat frequently that the user has to be in “control” over what’s on the
blockchain, but this can never be fully true - a blockchain is a one-way street, once
published, you can’t “control” the data back out of it. They seem to be implying that a
“personalized Blockchain” is required, a parallel blockchain akin to a branch in IOTAs
Tangle (but neither would the desired level of control be available in the IOTA system, 
nor has IOTA ever created even a working (decentralized) prototype, also apparently IOTA
is still a thing in 2022 lol).

They did, however, solve how to identify terrorists at the airport: You just need to write
"Not a terrorist" on the Blockchain!

> Lastly, in the worst case, some claims may require
  real-time proof of correctness (not being a terrorist when checking in to the airport).

The paper actually points out that a lot of this stuff would work without blockchain, 
too:

> The claims do not require any blockchain to be evaluated and may be shared with other platforms.

They never actually specify why it is worth going through all that trouble with
Blockchain. Instead, they refer to another paper:

> The concept of using blockchains as vessels for identity has been explained by Zyskind et al. \[5\]

That paper, **[Decentralizing Privacy: Using Blockchain to Protect Personal Data](
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7163223)**, unsurprisingly, also fails to make an
argument how blockchain is any better - as with all the papers above, it merely
describes complexity that would need to be added to make something work at all: 

> One of the
  major contributions of this paper is demonstrating how to overcome the public nature of
  the blockchain.

The only explanation of benefits is a vague “*Given this model, only the user has
control over her data*.” - based on ownership of the encryption key, orthogonal to the
blockchain; and that an adversary cannot “corrupt the network”. Unfortunately, in the
very next paragraph point out that adversaries *can* actually corrupt data, unless it is
sufficiently replicated:

> Note that while data integrity is not ensured in each node, 
  since a single node can tamper with its local copy or act in a byzantine way, we can
  still in practice minimize the risk with sufficient distribution and replication of the
  data.

This is unfortunately as far as that section goes.

Finally, **Towards Self-Sovereign Identity using Blockchain Technology** looks like a
Bachelor or Master thesis, and I’m not in the mood of trash-talking someone’s thesis.
TL; DR is that It falls into the same traps as discussed above, although it looks a bit
nicer.

### Real-World implementations?

The article **[In Search of Self-Sovereign Identity Leveraging Blockchain Technology](
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8776589)** was from June 2019, so what happened to
the 4 projects they mentioned?

* **[Uport](https://www.uport.me/)** has shut down. It split into **[serto.id](
  https://www.serto.id/)**, which seems dead, as their twitter feed and blog stop in Oct
  ‘21 - and **[veramo.io](https://veramo.io/)**, which pivoted to “A JavaScript
  framework for verifiable data”, and seems to have completely dropped anything
  “blockchain/DLT” - [a google search](
  https://www.google.com/search?q=site%3Averamo.io+dlt+OR+blockchain&oq=site%3A&aqs=chrome.0.69i59l3j69i57j69i59j69i58j69i65.2539j0j7&sourceid=chrome&ie=UTF-8)
  only shows 3 pages on their site that mention those terms, all in passing.
* **[Jolo](https://jolocom.io/)**, who’s homepage now prominently features a [blog
  post](https://jolocom.io/blog/dezentrale-identitaten-not-blockchain-2/) titled “Self
  Sovereign Identity ≠ Blockchain”, containing “In the past two years, the SSI community
  has emancipated itself from Blockchain technology” and “Why you do not need a
  Blockchain for Self Sovereign Identities.”.
* **Blockcert** seemed to have stopped their core work in 2017 - which is the date of
  the most recent blog post and most of the documentation - and their main product seems
  to not have left prototype phase: it hardcodes the wallet password to [\<empty\>](
  https://github.com/blockchain-certificates/wallet-android/blob/b225260adb18ce204c75b35e61651cb7ba5b9abe/LearningMachine/app/src/main/java/com/learningmachine/android/app/LMConstants.java#L9)
  and seems to skip quite a few certificate verification steps [\[1\]](
  https://github.com/blockchain-certificates/wallet-android/blob/b225260adb18ce204c75b35e61651cb7ba5b9abe/LearningMachine/app/src/main/java/com/learningmachine/android/app/LMConstants.java#L20), 
  [\[2\]](
  https://github.com/blockchain-certificates/wallet-android/blob/b225260adb18ce204c75b35e61651cb7ba5b9abe/LearningMachine/app/src/main/java/com/learningmachine/android/app/data/CertificateManager.java#L110-L120)
  (!!).

  The [FAQ](https://www.blockcerts.org/guide/faq.html), under the section ”Why use
  a blockchain instead of a PKI infrastructure?” claims that the blockchain provides
  tamper-proofs (in the presence of a trusted issuer key/identity, a problem [solved
  since 1977](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/RSA_(cryptosystem)>)). They do use the
  trusted timestamp argument, with a PoW chain, claiming that this avoids a trusted
  third party. According to their code they depend on the third parties
  [blockchain.info, learningmachines.com and their own blockcerts.org website](
  https://github.com/blockchain-certificates/wallet-android/blob/b225260adb18ce204c75b35e61651cb7ba5b9abe/LearningMachine/app/src/main/java/com/learningmachine/android/app/LMConstants.java#L12-L16), 
  the trust model for those is not discussed. Neither is discussed how trust with the
  certificate issuer is established. The FAQ refers to the wiki for further information, 
  [which is empty](https://github.com/blockchain-certificates/cert-schema/wiki/).
* **Sovrin**, which is likely the biggest player in the space. Their paper “[What goes
  on the ledger](
  https://sovrin.org/wp-content/uploads/2018/10/What-Goes-On-The-Ledger.pdf)” explicitly
  states that ordinary users would never store identifiers on the DLT - in fact, only
  larger entities, such as governments or corporations, would write their “public DIDs”
  to the Blockchain. Ordinary people would keep their “private DIDs” to themselves, 
  those work just fine without blockchain. But Sovrin doesn’t explain what the public
  DIDs gain from being on the blockchain. Also, the security of the current internet
  already has a very similar model of ~150 public government & corporate “Root CAs” -
  Sovrin doesn’t explain how their approach is fundamentally better (or even different, 
  apart from “blockchain!”).

  The [architecture diagram and website](
  https://www.evernym.com/case-studies-travelpass/)for their (only?) real-world
  implementation, IATA Travel Pass, does not mention anything blockchain related. I
  reached out to them and asked whether they used blockchain at all; they confirmed that
  they *do* use hyperledger (a permissioned blockchain only *they* can write to), but
  that IATA, the main stakeholder, also keeps their own, separate list of trusted
  certificates - making it fundamentally unclear why Sovrin even bothers running their
  blockchain instance.

  They also confirmed that Sovrin is moving away from a pure
  blockchain focus for their products.

Additionally, the “Necessity of Blockchain Technology” article mentioned

* [**IDChainZ**](https://www.chainzy.com/products/idchainz/) - at the time of writing, the
  images on the website don’t load, making it hard to evaluate the architecture. The
  “Download or Brochure” link 404s.
* [**EverID**](https://everidapp.com/) - all their social media went dead in April ‘21.
* LifeID, which is [dead, because the author pivoted](
  https://mirror.xyz/boscolo.eth/IihrrsuG92dqoKlL6uCaAcepGORxOjtT8TK5SH8Zmkw) to a
  [phone number-as-NFT](https://www.enum.wtf/) project.
* **ShoCard**, [acquired](
  https://www.techtarget.com/searchsecurity/news/252490177/Ping-acquires-blockchain-identity-startup-ShoCard)
  by a company called Ping Identity in 2020. There is no indication that Ping’s PingOne
  Cloud Platform has anything to do with Blockchain.
* **SelfKey**, whose [website](https://selfkey.org/) and [Twitter](
  https://twitter.com/selfkey) just screams “2017 ICO scam”. That being said though, in
  their [whitepaper](
  https://selfkey.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/selfkey-whitepaper-en.pdf), they seem
  almost excited about how they don’t use any DLT for SSI either, and somewhat argue
  that they shouldn’t. Their blockchain is only used to pay for attestations (i.e., pay
  a utility company to sign your credentials using their blockchain-based token).

It cannot be stressed enough that the only known wide-scale deployments of
anything related to W3C’s DID concept are the QR-code-on-paper based EU
vaccination certificate, and India's equivalent "DIVOC" passport.
The fact that EBSI & co. are waving around DID as a means to get grants, in 2022 (most
of the projects above died years ago, the papers were mostly writen in ‘18/’19) is
saddening.

## Parting Words

A lot of Blockchain + SSI projects start with the goal "take the power back". This is,
at it's core, a noble goal. But instead of solving the hard problems, like
* how to do ID recovery,
* how to ensure privacy and metadata resistance,
* how to deal with identity theft,
* how to ensure decentralization *and* interoperability,
* how to make SSI work for tech-illiterate people

they instead burned all the funding on trying - unsuccessfully - to make
Blockchain as useful as a piece of paper.
Imagine how much further we would be in Digital Identity today, if a huge chunk of the
funding would not have been burned on a fundamentally incompatible technology.

Blockchain adds a serious amount of complexity, drawbacks & costs to something that can
*demonstrably be done* without. This is an “the emperor has no clothes” situation - many
people have heavily invested in this. Nobody wants to admit they’re wrong. But the
reality is: A QR code is the superior tech.
